[ON-HOLD] Add ADR for Gateway API CRD installation. (#1993)
kyma-project/istio: docs/contributor/adr/0017-support-for-gateway-api.md

> # <!--- Provide title -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Support for Gateway API CRD Installation
```

## Status
<!--- Specify the current state of the ADR, such as whether it is proposed, accepted, rejected, deprecated, superseded, etc. -->
Proposed

## Context
<!--- Describe the issue or problem that is motivating this decision or change. -->
<!--What is the issue that we're seeing that is motivating this decision or change?-->
The Gateway API is an official Kubernetes project that provides a collection of APIs for L4 and L7 traffic routing and management. It represents the next generation of Kubernetes Ingress, Load Balancing, and Service Mesh APIs, designed from the outset to be generic, expressive, and role-oriented.

> In Istio to fully utilize the capabilities of Ambient mode, especially waypoint proxies, we need to support Gateway API CRD installation in Istio CR. Support via feature enablement in Istio CR allows management of the lifecycle of Gateway API CRDs and manual installation by user is not needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Istio, to fully utilize Ambient mode's capabilities, especially waypoint proxies, we need to support Gateway API CRD installation in the Istio CR. Supporting this feature in the Istio CR enables managing the lifecycle of Gateway API CRDs and eliminates the need for manual user installation.
```

## Decision
<!--- Explain the proposed change or action and the reason behind it. -->
<!--What is the change that we're proposing and/or doing?-->

We will add support for Gateway API CRD installation and uninstallation in Istio CR. 

> Feature will be experimental only for now. In the future it will be promoted outside the experimental. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The feature will be experimental only for now. In the future, it will be promoted outside the experimental. 
```

Istio controller will manage the lifecycle of the Gateway API CRD, which are properly labeled and hence managed by Istio module. The module never installs or removes Gateway API

> CRDs unless explicitly instructed to do so through this field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Istio controller will manage the lifecycle of the Gateway API CRD, which are properly labeled and hence managed by the Istio module. The module never installs or removes the Gateway API
CRDs unless explicitly instructed to do so through this field.
```

> ### Istio Custom Resource configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Istio Custom Resource Configuration
```

1. Add the **enableGatewayAPI** field: 
    - Location: **Experimental** struct in the Istio CR specification 
    - Type: `*bool` (optional)
    - Default: none (when unset disabled)

>     - UI Integration: For now not configurable and not displayed in Kyma dashboard as it is experimental feature only. When promoted outside experimental, it will be configurable and displayed in Kyma dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - UI Integration: For now, not configurable and not displayed in Kyma dashboard as it is an experimental feature only. When promoted outside experimental, it will be configurable and displayed in Kyma dashboard.
```

2. Validation:
    - Boolean validation via Istio CRD

> ### Controller logic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Controller Logic
```

#### Ownership Model

The module uses the label `kyma-project.io/module=istio` to mark CRDs it owns.
**Only labeled CRDs are ever modified or deleted by the module.** This is the central
invariant of the entire lifecycle:

- CRDs created by the module are always labeled at creation time.
- CRDs found on the cluster without this label are treated as user-managed and are
  never touched — neither updated nor deleted.
- The user can hand over ownership of an existing CRD to the module by manually adding
  the label. From the next reconciliation cycle onward, the module will manage it.

#### Installation and Reconciliation (`enableGatewayAPI: true`)

On every reconciliation cycle before proceeding with the Istio installation the

> installer processes each Gateway API CRD from the embedded bundle and takes one of the following actions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On every reconciliation cycle, before proceeding with the Istio installation, the
installer processes each Gateway API CRD from the embedded bundle and takes one of the following actions:
```

| CRD state on cluster       | Action |
|----------------------------------------|---|
| Not present                            | Created and labeled as module-owned |
| Present, module-owned, version matches | No change (idempotent) |
| Present, module-owned, version differs | Updated to bundle version |
| Present, **not** module-owned          | Skipped – label hint logged |

> **Note:** When some CRDs already exist on the cluster without the module label
> (e.g. installed manually by the user or by another tool), the module logs a warning
> listing each unmanaged CRD and the exact `kubectl label` action required to transfer
> ownership. Istio installation continues regardless — unmanaged CRDs do not block the

> > reconciliation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE] 
> When some CRDs already exist in the cluster without the module label
> (for example, installed manually by the user or by another tool), the module logs a warning
> listing each unmanaged CRD and the exact `kubectl label` action required to transfer
> ownership. Istio installation continues regardless — unmanaged CRDs do not block the
> reconciliation.
```

> **Important:** A partial state is possible — some CRDs managed by the module, some
> not. The module handles each CRD independently, so partial ownership is a valid and
> stable runtime state. The user is responsible for deciding whether to transfer

> > ownership of unmanaged CRDs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!IMPORTANT]  
> A partial state is possible — the module can manage some CRDs while leaving others unmanaged. 
> The module handles each CRD independently, so partial ownership is a valid and
> stable runtime state. The user is responsible for deciding whether to transfer
> ownership of unmanaged CRDs.
```

### Uninstallation – Feature Disabled (`enableGatewayAPI: false` after previously `true`)

> When `enableGatewayAPI` is explicitly set to `false` (or removed) after having been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When **enableGatewayAPI** is explicitly set to `false` (or removed) after having been
```

previously enabled, the module uninstalls Gateway API CRDs as part of the
next reconciliation cycle. The cleanup checks:

> 1. Only CRDs carrying the module ownership label are candidates for deletion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Only CRDs with the module ownership label are candidates for deletion.
```

2. Before deleting any CRD, the module scans the cluster for existing Gateway API

>    custom resources that's CRDs are managed by Istio module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Before deleting any CRD, the module scans the cluster for existing Gateway API
   custom resources that are instances of CRDs managed by the Istio module.
```

or `... custom resources representing CRDs that are managed by the Istio module.`

3. If **any** such resources are found, deletion is **blocked**. The module sets the
   proper condition on the Istio CR, logs each blocking resource by
   name and namespace, and returns an error. The reconciler will retry on the next

>    cycle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If **any** such resources are found, deletion is **blocked**. The module sets the
   proper condition on the Istio CR, logs each blocking resource by
   name and namespace, and returns an error. The reconciler retries deletion in the next cycle.
```

4. Only when the cluster is free of Gateway API custom resources which parents CRDs are managed will the module

>    proceed to delete the labeled CRDs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The module deletes the labeled CRDs only when the cluster doesn't contain Gateway API custom resources whose parent CRDs are managed.
```

> > **Note:** Unmanaged CRDs (no module label) are never deleted, even when the feature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> Unmanaged CRDs (no module label) are never deleted, even when the feature
```

> is disabled. They remain on the cluster as the user left them.

> **Note:** The cleanup path is only triggered when the feature was **previously
> explicitly enabled** — tracked via the last-applied configuration annotation. Setting
> `enableGatewayAPI: false` on a fresh Istio CR that never had it enabled is a

> > complete no-op. This prevents accidental cleanup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> The cleanup path is only triggered when the feature was previously
> explicitly enabled — tracked via the last-applied configuration annotation. Setting
> `enableGatewayAPI: false` in a new Istio CR that never had it enabled is a
> complete no-op. This prevents accidental cleanup.
```

### Uninstallation – Istio CR Deleted

> When the Istio CR itself is deleted, the same uninstall Gateway API CRDs logic
> applies: only module-labeled CRDs are removed, and only if no corresponding Gateway API custom
> resources are present on the cluster. If blocking resources exist, the
> proper condition is set and the finalizer is **not** removed, keeping
> the Istio CR in a terminating state until the user cleans up the Gateway API resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the Istio CR itself is deleted, the same uninstall Gateway API CRDs logic
applies: only module-labeled CRDs are removed, and only if no corresponding Gateway API custom
resources are present in the cluster. If blocking resources exist, the
proper condition is set, and the finalizer is **not** removed, keeping
the Istio CR in a terminating state until the user cleans up the Gateway API resources.
```

## Consequences
<!--- Discuss the impact of this change, including what becomes easier or more complicated as a result. -->
<!--What becomes easier or more difficult to do because of this change?-->

> ### Benefits:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Benefits
```

- **No silent side effects.** The module never touches resources it does not own. Users
  who manage Gateway API CRDs independently are not affected.
- **Partial installation is stable.** The module does not require all-or-nothing
  ownership. Mixed states (some CRDs owned, some not) are handled gracefully on every
  reconciliation.
- **Version is pinned to the bundle.** The module does not attempt to detect or

>   reconcile arbitrary versions already on the cluster. It only applies the version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  reconcile arbitrary versions already in the cluster. It only applies the version
```

  embedded in the controller binary. Version upgrades happen automatically on the next
  reconciliation after a controller update.
- **Improved user experience.** Gateway API CRD lifecycle is fully automated through the Istio controller, removing the need for manual installation and enabling users to leverage the full potential of Ambient mode and waypoint proxies as also Gateway API CRs.

> ### Trade-offs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Trade-Offs
```

# Support for Gateway API CRD Installation

## Status
<!--- Specify the current state of the ADR, such as whether it is proposed, accepted, rejected, deprecated, superseded, etc. -->
Proposed

## Context
<!--- Describe the issue or problem that is motivating this decision or change. -->
<!--What is the issue that we're seeing that is motivating this decision or change?-->
The Gateway API is an official Kubernetes project that provides a collection of APIs for L4 and L7 traffic routing and management. It represents the next generation of Kubernetes Ingress, Load Balancing, and Service Mesh APIs, designed from the outset to be generic, expressive, and role-oriented.

In Istio, to fully utilize Ambient mode's capabilities, especially waypoint proxies, we need to support Gateway API CRD installation in the Istio CR. Supporting this feature in the Istio CR enables managing the lifecycle of Gateway API CRDs and eliminates the need for manual user installation.

## Decision
<!--- Explain the proposed change or action and the reason behind it. -->
<!--What is the change that we're proposing and/or doing?-->

> We will add new feature wrapper for settings regarding Gateway API support in Istio CR. Initial field of this feature setting will be responsible for Gateway API CRD installation and uninstallation in Istio CR. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will add a new feature wrapper for settings regarding Gateway API support in the Istio CR. The initial field of this feature setting will be responsible for Gateway API CRD installation and uninstallation in the Istio CR. 
```

- **Version is pinned to the bundle.** The module does not attempt to detect or
  reconcile arbitrary versions already in the cluster. It only applies the version
  embedded in the controller binary. Version upgrades happen automatically on the next
  reconciliation after a controller update.
- **Improved user experience.** Gateway API CRD lifecycle is fully automated through the Istio controller, removing the need for manual installation and enabling users to leverage the full potential of Ambient mode and waypoint proxies as also Gateway API CRs.

### Trade-Offs
- **Ownership transfer is manual and opt-in.** There is no automatic adoption of
  pre-existing CRDs. The user must explicitly add the module label to signal intent.
- **Gateway API version maintenance.** The module pins Gateway API CRDs to the version embedded in the controller binary. Compatibility with Istio versions must be tracked and communicated, and potential breaking changes must be planned during Istio upgrades.
- **Increased controller complexity.** Managing the full CRD lifecycle — installation, updates, ownership tracking, and safe deletion — adds non-trivial logic to the controller reconciliation flow.

> - **Once managed by module no easy way back.** Once user gives the ownership of a CRD to the module, it won't be an easy way back to manage it by user. This means that even if the user later decides to manage the CRD independently, they must first remove the module setting - manually delete CRs, module will delete CRDs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Once managed by module, there's no easy way back.** Once the user grants ownership of a CRD to the module, reverting to user-managed control later is difficult. This means that even if the user later decides to manage the CRD independently, they must first remove the module setting - manually delete CRs, and the module will delete CRDs.
```

Author: not applicable, tested on cluster and removing labels, remove management by istio module

# <!--- Provide title -->

## Status
<!--- Specify the current state of the ADR, such as whether it is proposed, accepted, rejected, deprecated, superseded, etc. -->
Proposed

## Context
<!--- Describe the issue or problem that is motivating this decision or change. -->
<!--What is the issue that we're seeing that is motivating this decision or change?-->
The Gateway API is an official Kubernetes project that provides a collection of APIs for L4 and L7 traffic routing and management. It represents the next generation of Kubernetes Ingress, Load Balancing, and Service Mesh APIs, designed from the outset to be generic, expressive, and role-oriented.

> In Istio to fully utilize the capabilities of Ambient mode, especially waypoint proxies, we need to support Gateway API CRD installation in Istio CR. Installation via feature enablement in Istio CR allows management of the lifecycle of Gateway API CRDs and manual installation by user is not needed.

Reviewer 2: I'd call it more like support Gateway API installation in the Istio module. The fact that we expose an API to enable it in the module is just a detail and can be described in the following sentences.

Author: chnaged to statement about support of Gateway API CRD

## Decision
<!--- Explain the proposed change or action and the reason behind it. -->
<!--What is the change that we're proposing and/or doing?-->

> We will add support for Gateway API CRD installation and uninstallation in Istio CR. Feature will be experimental only. Istio controller will manage the lifecycle of the Gateway API CRD, which are properly labeled. 

Reviewer 2: It's gonna be experimental only for a limited period of time, we could mention that. And that it will be promoted outside of the experimental in the future

Author: Chnaged statement about experimental, added information that it is planned in the future to promote outside the experimental.

### Istio CR configuration:
1. Add the **enableGatewayAPI** field: 
    - Location: **Experimental** struct in the Istio CR specification 
    - Type: `*bool` (optional)
    - Default: none (when unset disabled)
    - UI Integration: Not configurable and not displayed in Kyma dashboard as for now it is experimental feature only 
2. Validation:
    - Boolean validation via Istio CRD

### Controller logic:
1. **Installation:** When **enableGatewayAPI** transitions to `true`, check for existing Gateway API CRDs. If found, and they were not applied by Istio controller (check for Istio module label), log and warn user that there already exist Gateway API CRD on cluster. 
2. Gateway API CRD lifecycle management in Istio controller:
    - **Labeling strategy**: Add management labels to distinguish Istio-managed Gateway API CRDs, for example label `kyma-project.io/module=istio`
    - **Deletion protection**: Add warning to Istio CR status and log it in istio controller manager if active CRs of Gateway API exist and **enableGatewayAPI** would be set to false. Add to Istio finalizers to prevent accidental deletion of Gateway API CRDs with active Gateway API CRs on cluster. 

>     - **Reconciliation**: Reconcile Gateway API CRD presence and version during Istio CR reconciliation. If **enableGatewayAPI** is `true` but CRD is missing, attempt to reinstall it. If CRD version is incompatible with current Istio version, log warning and attempt to update to supported version if possible.

Reviewer 2: I think this `and attempt to update to supported version if possible.` is not particularly clear. It's not an automatic operation. We bump Istio manually, and we control version of the Gateway API CRD also manually. We should ensure at the development level, that both are compatible with each other.

Reviewer 2: We also need some way to ensure that both are compatible. Do we have any solution for that at this point?

Author: response to 1st comment: There were added extended descriptions of the installation process with overall logic how the version of the GA CRD is chosen.
response to 2nd comment: At this point the only solution we have is to specify in file `gateway_api_crds.go` in const `gatewayAPIVersion` expected Gateway API CRD managed by current version of Istio module. Maybe connect it somehow to the supporte version of GA CRDs by upstream Istio . But the most problematic here is AFAIK that upstream Istio doesn't specify in some official way (source of true), which version of GA CRD they support ~ maybe worth contacting them; going one more time through docuemntation to look for that.

## Consequences
<!--- Discuss the impact of this change, including what becomes easier or more complicated as a result. -->
<!--What becomes easier or more difficult to do because of this change?-->

### Benefits:
- Ambient mode fully leverages Gateway API capabilities, especially for Waypoint proxies.
- Improved user experience with automated Gateway API CRD installation management through the Istio controller.
- Gateway API enables customers to create additional Istio Ingress Gateways.

### Trade-offs:
- Maintenance of Gateway API versioning and compatibility with Istio versions. Istio documentation does not specify which Gateway API CRD versions are supported, requiring us to track and update them as needed. During Istio upgrades, we must plan for and communicate potential breaking changes to users.

> - Potential user confusion if existing Gateway API CRDs are present when enabling the feature.

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't mention that. If user is confused we failed at user experience.

Author: Nice catch, changed it
